Ibrahim Ahmed
The Arctic Refugee

From the hole in an igloo at the top of the world I looked at the universal 
abyss widening in front of me. The moon and the stars danced by my 
side, and I thought Allah would be so close that I could see him. But my 
mind was elsewhere as I waited in fear for the Eskimo chief's decision. 
Would they grant me asylum, or would they push me over this icy edge 
into the world to come?
  Countries kicked me around the way we played with a rag ball in our 
muddy ally back home, but, fortunately, they did not hand me over to the 
Iraqi authorities. At the airport in Stockholm the police questioned me for 
hours and denied me asylum. I told them I came from Libya after the 
Libyans terminated my work contract. They told me that Libya was a sig- 
natory to the 1951 Geneva Refugee Convention and that I should have 
applied for asylum there. I was too embarrassed to tell them that I had 
tried in vain with the Arab brothers there to let me stay in their wide, 
warm country. I even reminded them of our blood ties, which they used 
to say were thicker than the ink of conventions. and the urge 
to tell the truth had plagued my life.
  The Germans turned me down at the borders because I came from 
Sweden, also a signatory to the 1951 Geneva Refugee Convention, and the 
Danes because I was coming from Germany, also a signatory to the 1951 
Geneva Refugee Convention. And Norway. I wondered if that Geneva 
Convention was written in ink or in mercury, on paper in elegant closets 
or on my grandma's gravestone.
  My attention was divided between an endless highway buzzing with 
semis loaded with mobile homes and a massive frozen ocean. If we could 
survive underwater, I thought, then the hazards of living next to killer 
whales and sharks would not be too bad in comparison to human 
insults.
  "Am I heading in the right direction?" an old man asked me. He was 
on a dog sledge, and snow was falling from his beard.
  "What do you mean?"
  "Don't you know the Eskimo country? Don't you know me?"
  I felt flattered and elated. If the man thought I knew his way, then
perhaps I knew my own way. My intuition, dead for years, came to life. 
  "You are," I said with confidence.
  I felt embarrassed when I realized I was pointing to the sea, but it 
seemed my intuition was flawless.

    "You saved me from myself," the old man said gleefully. "I have been 
   telling myself for the past hour that I came from this direction."
    He moved, then pulled at his eight dogs and stopped.
    "Do you want to come with me?" he said as soon as he turned his 
  head. His warmth reminded me of the village I had left thirty years ear- 
  lier. I decided to stop being naive and accepted his invitation. The land of  
  the Eskimos was just one more frontier before the Bermuda Triangle.
    The old man had me sit on the part of the seat he had been sitting on, 
  and I felt the warmth. He pulled out three bottles of alcohol and told me 
  he exchanged them in Oslo for fox and polar bear and seal hides. A whole 
  year's worth of hunting. That was an excellent deal, I told him. If I were to 
  return to Iraq I'd exchange all the hides I could think of for a bottle of 
  arak. That, too, would be an excellent deal, he said.
    He opened a bottle and said, "Let's introduce our names to alcohol." I 
  pronounced my name, but it froze as soon as it came out of my mouth. His 
  came out fine, but I wondered if my frozen head got it. He started calling 
  me "Ki," probably the part he heard from "Iraqi."
    "Ki in our tongue means 'lock,' and I think it means 'key' in English," 
  he said smiling. "What does it mean in your language?"
    "Lock and key and belly dancing," I said.
    "That's what I thought," he said and opened another bottle. We took 
  turns drinking from the bottle. For some reason the odor from the sweat 
  of the running dogs reminded me of our own odor in an ancient political 
  demonstration. I started singing to the dogs hoping to prompt them to 
  hurry, but the old man thought my voice was too sad and, if anything, 
  would induce the dogs to pee. We had slices of raw sea-lion liver with the 
  alcohol, and I started to better appreciate the effort and the skill of the 
  running dogs over the frozen ocean. They stayed away from all those 
  warm undercurrents going south.
    "Ki, will you mind if I keep half this bottle for my wife?" the old man 
  asked. "I want to wipe away half her years tonight."
    Then he closed his eyes and went to sleep. I was scared because I didn't 
  even know how to steer the sleigh. And which way to go in this Arctic re- 
  gion? Moonlight was gliding over the snow, and the sleigh seemed to be 
  airborne. I decided to leave matters to the dogs and the moon. Perhaps the 
  dogs had their clue from the old man's breathing. I went back to thinking of 
the Geneva Convention and must have fallen asleep. I awoke as the old man 
shook my shoulders.
  "Ki, Ki. Wake up. You have arrived in the land of the Eskimo."
  I saw men and women with round, red faces teasing my chin and 
nose with fishtails. That was their warmest greeting, the old man 
explained.
  Their chief summoned me as soon as I arrived. He wanted to intro- 
duce himself, I was told. I was overwhelmed by that humility, but some 
old grudges against rulers brought me enough depressing trepidation.
  The chief placed a small fish in my hand and had me sit on a seal hide. 
His consoling smiles dissipated my confusion. His entourage was there, 
and I thought that if he intended to interrogate me, then the Eskimos must 
be some of the most considerate people. He took me by surprise when he 
asked me how my people treated dogs. I was thinking of the Geneva Con- 
vention all the time, and I had prepared some really impressive answers 
in response to several of its articles. I was inspired in that long snow ride, 
and I told myself just to lie and lie. The chief's question made me feel I 
wanted to sleep.
  "We treat them with the utmost respect," I said without thinking. 
"We give them the highest positions. They tear our flesh apart, but we 
worship them."
  "Who pulls the sleighs?" he asked.
  I yawned, and when I saw that my head was not cut off for yawning 
in the presence of royalty, I said with some ease, "We have automobiles 
and oil. A lot of oil, and we'll give you some of it."
  "No, thanks, we're fine," the chief said with the mortification of a vir- 
gin shying away from the first kiss. He gulped a handful of snow and 
added, "How about the fish? How do you treat them?"
  Another question I was not prepared for. What would my prepared 
lies do with that? I decided to tell the truth.
  "Very generously, sir. We feed them the flesh of our enemy soldiers 
and that of our own."
  The chief seemed disgusted and spit out the raw fish he was chewing. 
His entourage became restless. The chief was evidently disappointed and
even upset. He sat back in his chair, and everybody appeared stressed. 
Fear came back, and I started blaming myself again for my naivete and 
sheer stupidity. That part of me was incorrigible.
 They then brought me to this igloo, but in a manner much nicer than 
what I had seen at airports. The sound of running feet on snow reached 
me, and I saw three men carrying lanterns. The lanterns burned with the 
smell of fish oil, and their light fell on a beautiful woman's face.
 They were carrying a word from the chief, and they unrolled a piece 
of dried wolf skin and read respectfully. "Do not ask him to return to his 
country before you know that his people have stopped eating the flesh of 
their own in the fish they eat." Then they introduced the woman. They 
said she fell in love with me when she saw me disembark from the sleigh, 
still under the spell of sleep. The chief had blessed her love, they said.

That night I missed only Iraq's golden palm dates.

